c. Technologies Enabling Solar-Powered DC Microgrids
Microgrids could play an important role in the deployment of distributed energy
resources, like distributed photovoltaic systems, and in improving grid reliability and
resiliency. Microgrids typically consist of loads and distributed generation assets that are
connected via a small-scale grid and are controlled as a single entity with respect to the
rest of the electricity grid. Alternating-current (ac) microgrids are the typical
configuration, However, the concept of direct-current (dc) microgrids has been gaining
interest as there are certain applications that are better aligned with and could benefit
from dc microgrids. These could also involve dc distribution systems and nanogrid
within buildings, which could directly connect dc energy sources (e.g. on-site PV
generation and dc-coupled energy storage) and serve dc loads (e.g. LED lighting,
computers and electronics, electric vehicle charging, HVAC and water heating systems
with variable frequency drives) directly from a dc bus. Broader adoption and
deployment of such dc microgrids will critically depend on a compelling value
proposition, technical advancement in modeling, operation, and control technologies,
commercial availability, and standardization of dc equipment and appliances, as well as
development of appropriate reliability and safety standards.
This subtopic seeks applications to advance the components, design, and commercial
maturity of dc microgrids incorporating solar energy resources, dc loads, and potentially
dc-coupled energy storage.
Specific areas of interest include, but are not limited to:

- Innovative designs and architectures of dc microgrid and building nanogrids.

- Tools for planning, design, and quantification of benefits of dc microgrids.

- Power electronic for dc bus architectures including solar PV.

- Local controllers and energy management systems for the operation of dc microgrids.

- Local and wide-area control systems for the operation of multiple interconnected dc
microgrids with multiple distributed energy resources.

- Modeling and simulation of dc systems and microgrids, including operation, control,
and stability analysis.

- Systems for fault detection, protection, and dc circuit breaker hardware.
Areas not of interest for this subtopic:

- Development of dc appliances.

- Converters and power electronics not designed and intended for dc microgrid
operation.

- Technologies and products for ac microgrids.


Questions – contact solar.sbir@ee.doe.gov


d. Cybersecurity of Solar Energy Systems (DOE Crosscuts: Grid Modernization, Energy
Sector Cybersecurity)
Ensuring reliable and safe operation of electrical grids is critical for the U.S. economy
and national security. Cybersecurity of the electricity grid is regarded as the protection
of interconnected electric power systems from digital attacks. As the amount of solar
energy on the grid grows, solar has become as an integral part of the system,
contributing to large-scale generation, as well as small-scale distributed energy resource
(DER) generation in the form of rooftop installations, storage systems, and microgrids,
which typically are spread out over a wide area. Unlike large-scale generation systems
that must be compliant to critical infrastructure protection standards before they can be
operational, smaller PV systems and other DERs currently do not have any cybersecurity
standards to follow, and they are usually connected by their owners to necessary
networks for monitoring and control purposes. The electric grid is a cyber-physical
system, thus cyberattacks on the grid can cause physical damage and safety issues in
addition to disrupting information flow. Growing deployment of DER networks in
electric grid led to a rise in the attack surface against these systems, and result in higher
vulnerabilities in the grid that hackers can exploit, making DER cybersecurity a key
challenge for grid operators and solar system owners.
Improving cybersecurity in renewable energy is part of DOE Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy (EERE) Office’s Multi-Year Program Plan [1], and also supports SETO’s
goals of reliably and securely integrating solar electricity into the grid [2]. In 2022, the
Office of EERE along with the Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response (CESER), developed the Cybersecurity Considerations for DER on the U.S.
Electric Grid report [3], which provides recommendations for the DER industries, energy
sector, and government to secure current and future systems. Over the past decade,
SETO has funded various research and development programs [4-8] that aim to
understand the evolving characteristics of cyberattacks, advance cybersecurity
technologies to protect electric grids from cyberattacks, and develop cybersecurity
standards and certifications.
This subtopic seeks to advance technologies and products to enable more cyber-aware
and cyber-secure electric power systems with high penetration of solar (particularly in
the form of distributed deployment) and to improve the ability of electric grids and solar
assets, like solar/hybrid power plants and their components (e.g., electronic devices
associated with solar energy systems, such as inverters, dc-dc optimizers or other
converters, smart meters, and grid-edge devices) to protect themselves from and
quickly recover in response to cyber threats.
Specific areas of interest include, but not limited to:

- Innovative cyberattack detection and identification schemes that can be applied
across various solar assets, from distributed customer devices to utility-scale
systems.

- Tools that perform risk assessments that recognize the increasing
interdependencies between physical and cyber (information and communication)
systems and evaluate how cyberattacks can affect electric power grid operations.

- Automated risk-mitigation strategies that allow rapid response and service
restoration of electric grid and solar assets after cyber-attacks and demonstrate the
system ability to endure multiple simultaneous attacks.

- Device-level cybersecurity and protection systems that enable self-awareness into
the grid-interactive solar assets.

- Controls and operations of solar assets that are designed and can be deployed
adhering with zero trust principles where data and commands from remote devices
are validated using cryptographically secure mechanisms (e.g., the capability to
reject a setpoint/commands and take corrective actions if the estimated risk factor
is high enough to cause instability and abnormal operations).

- System-level cyber threat detection, identification and mitigation approaches via
cooperative strategies among large amounts of geographically dispersed solar
assets, other DERs, and sensors based on either centralized or distributed
communication networks.


Questions – contact solar.sbir@ee.doe.gov



e. Distribution Reliability Visibility (DOE Crosscuts: Grid Modernization)
The increased adoption of distributed solar and other energy resources (DERs) can
impact the performance of distribution system if not properly managed and challenge
the reliable operation of distribution grids. The impacts (e.g., overvoltage and thermal
violations, miscoordination and misoperation of protection devices, faster dynamics,
uncertain, and potential adverse control interactions of inverter-based resources, etc.)
are exacerbated by a lack of operator situational awareness of distribution grids,
particularly the assets and systems at the grid-edge and even behind-the-meter. SETO
tries to address solar energy system integration challenges [1] and has funded multiple
research, development and deployment programs to understand the behavior of grids
with high contributions from DER and inverter-based resources through various funding
opportunities [2-7]. These programs have aimed to understand the fundamental needs
of sensors and measurements and advance technologies that enhance the visibility and
controllability of distribution grids with high penetration of solar and other DERs.
This subtopic seeks to advance technologies and products to enhance the visibility of
distribution grids and provide actionable information for grid operators to safely and
reliably operate the distribution system.
Specific areas of interest include, but not limited to:

- Advanced voltage monitoring and analysis systems that can
o estimate the spatial and temporal voltage profiles of distribution feeders
in real-time by considering the intermittency and uncertainty of solar
energy resources;
o detect the ‘hotspot’ node voltages exceeding safe operational limits;
o facilitate voltage stability margin and hosting capacity estimation and
analysis; and
o enable optimal voltage control via inverter-based DERs and other gridedge devices.
The proposed solutions must also be computationally efficient to be suitable for realtime applications.

- Advanced distribution state estimation techniques that can address the
complications inherent with distribution grids (e.g., time-varying unbalance,
limited availability of real-time measurements, asynchronous and/or
heterogenous measurements from different sensing/metering infrastructures,
incorrectly captured and/or time-varying network connectivity and topology,
etc.). The proposed solutions must also be computationally efficient to be
suitable for real-time applications.

- Innovative technologies that can estimate and predict dynamic operating
envelopes and reserve margins (generally defined as time-varying upper and
lower bounds on the import or export of power in a given time interval) of DERs
at various aggregation levels of connection points (e.g., service entry point,
feeder, substation level, or subdivision of a distribution system). The developed
solutions are expected to support distribution operation in real-/near-real-time,
increase the utilization of DERs and assist DERs to participate in energy and
network services markets.

- Innovative technologies that support dynamic hosting capacity estimate for
utilities to better strategize for distribution system upgrades. The developed
solutions are expected to incorporate, besides siting considerations of DERs,
autonomous inverter functions (e.g. volt-var control), and/or optimal
coordinated control of DER at various aggregate levels.

- Innovative technologies that identify emerging risks and unstable system
dynamics in real time and predict future behaviors. The developed solutions are
expected to ingest large amounts of data captured by dispersed sensors and
monitoring devices with various resolutions and sources, such as wide-area
phasor measurement units, substation intelligent electronic devices, devices
capable of streaming point-on-wave data, power quality meters, and digital fault
recorders and relays, and energy management systems. The solutions are also
expected to provide automatic event analysis, reporting, and recommendations
for reliability risk mitigation.

- Grid-Edge intelligent analytics and devices that can improve distribution
system’s situational awareness, assist DER aggregation and support automated
control and operation of distribution grids. The developed solutions are
expected to host advanced real-time analytics and optimization (example
applications listed above), and support flexible and open communication and
control architectures (e.g., the cloud/utility premises;
centralized/decentralized/distributed) for interoperable integration to a utility
distributed energy resource management systems (DERMS) or advanced
distribution management systems (ADMS), a third party aggregator DERMS, and
behind-the-meter (BTM) assets and resources.
Areas not of interest:

- Solutions that primarily focus on health monitoring and diagnostic of individual
grid components and assets